# Basic maths for Statistics

## Calculus

#### notions

*Exponential* this is the term used as power, e.g. 2<sup>3</sup>
When multiplying scalars, their exponents addup, e.g. 2x<sup>3</sup>*4x<sup>2</sup>=8x<sup>5</sup>
When dividing scalars, their exponents are subtracted, e.g. 4x<sup>2</sup>/2x<sup>3</sup>=2x<sup>-1</sup>

*Radical* is the operation to find the root number, e.g.	$\sqrt[3]{8}$  which is also 8<sup>1/3</sup>

*Logarithm* is the operation to find the exponent, e.g. log<sub>(2)</sub>(8)

_In Python:_
```python
import math
x = 2**3
print(x)
rad = 8**(1./3)
print(rad)
lg = math.log(2, 8)
print(lg)
```

_In Matlab/Octave:_
```Octave
x = 2^3
rad = 8^(1/3)
lg = log(8)/log(2) % log is the is the natural logarithm
```


### Good old stuff to remember

__Difference of squares__

x<sup>2</sup>-b can be rewriten as x<sup>2</sup>-$\sqrt(b)$ <sup>2</sup>
which itselft = (x-$sqrt(b)$)(a+$sqrt(b)$)

_Example of difference of squares_

x<sup>2</sup>-9 = x<sup>2</sup>-3<sup>2</sup> = (x-3)(x+3)

__Perfect squares__

(a+b)<sup>2</sup> = a<sup>2</sup>+b<sup>2</sup>+2ab.

__How to solve a quadratic equation y = ax<sup>2</sup>+bx+c__
- Case 1: use the solution x = (-b +- $\sqrt(b^2-4ac)$) / 2a and get values of y for these two symetric x values
- Case 2: use the vertex of the quadratic equation with h=-b/2a, and use this value as x to find y.
- Case 3: use factorization based on the polynomial a<sup>2</sup>+b<sup>2</sup>+2ab.

_Example of factorization_

1. y = x<sup>2</sup>+6x-7
2. setting y = 0 we obtain x<sup>2</sup>+6x = 7
3. we want an equation looking like x<sup>2</sup>+c<sup>2</sup>+2cx, that is 2cx=6 thus c=3
4. we rewrite the equation as x<sup>2</sup>+9+6x=16 which is our familiar polynomial and can thus be factorized
5. we rewrite the equation as (x+3)<sup>2</sup> = 16
6. the solution is x -3 = +-4 i.e. x = [-7 1]

### Functions

__Derivatives__

For a given function f(x), we can get the slope by computing the derivative. If we want to know the slope at a given point, we need to take points at the limits. For intance, for f(x) = x<sup>2</sup>+1, we want to compute the slope at x = 5 taking lim f(x) x--> 5.

To compute the derivative, simply take the distance between two points, h, and make that distance infinitessimally small. The slope is y(2)-y(1) / x(2)-(1) i.e. y(2)-y(1) / h, and for a function this is f(x2)-f(x1)/h.

_Example of derivative_

- f(x) = x<sup>2</sup>+1
- h = x2-x1 and thus x2 = h+x1
- m = f(x2)-f(x1)/h and thus m = f(x1+h)-f(x1)/h
- f'(x) = lim<sub>h-->0</sub> f(x1+h)-f(x1)/h is the derivative, the tangente of the point x1, the slope

1. At say x = 3, we have f'(3) = [f(3+h)-f(3)]/h
2. We rewrite as f'(3) = [(3+h)<sup>2</sup>+1 - 3<sup>2</sup>+1] /h
3. This simplyfies to f'(3) = [h<sup>2</sup>+6h] / h i.e. h+6
4. Thus f'(3) lim<sub>h-->0</sub> = 6

_In Python:_
```python
from matplotlib import pyplot

# define the function f
def f(x):
    return x**2+1

# pick up some xs to get ys
x = list(range(-10, 11))
y = [f(i) for i in x]

# define the derivative
def df(x,h):
    return (f(x+h)-f(x))/h

x1 = 3
y1 = f(x1)
h = 0.1
m = round(df(x1,h))
print('At x=3 the derivative/slope is', m)

# plot
pyplot.xlabel('x')
pyplot.ylabel('f(x)')
pyplot.grid()
pyplot.plot(x,y, color='green')
pyplot.scatter(3,10, c='red')
xMin = x1-1
xMax = x1+1
yMin = y1-m
yMax = y1+m
pyplot.plot([xMin,xMax],[yMin,yMax], color='magenta')
pyplot.show()
```

_In Matlab/Octave:_
```Octave
% define the function f
f = @(x) x.^2 +1;

% pick up some xs to get ys
x = linspace(-10,10);
y = f(x);

% define the derivative
df = @(x,h) (f(x+h)-f(x))/h;

x1 = 3;
y1 = f(x1);
h = 0.1;
m = round(df(x1,h));
fprintf('At x=3 the derivative/slope is %g \n',m)

% plot
plot(x,y, 'green')
hold on; grid on
xMin = x1-1;
xMax = x1+1;
yMin = y1-m;
yMax = y1+m;
scatter(3,10, 'red','filled')
plot([xMin,xMax],[yMin,yMax], 'magenta')
xlabel('x')
ylabel('f(x)')
```


_Short cuts_

If f(x)=c, then f'(x)=0, i.e. the derivative of a constant is 0.

If f(x)=g(x)+h(x), then f'(x)=g'(x)+h'(x).

If f(x)=x<sup>n</sup>, then f'(x)=nx<sup>n-1</sup>. This is known as the Power Rule.
For instance the derivative of 10x is 10 (10 * 0x<sup>0</sup>), similarly 10 * x<sup>2</sup> derivative is 20x (10 * 2x<sup>2-1</sup>).

If f(x)=g(x)*h(x), then f'(x)=(g'(x)*h(x))+(g(x)*h'(x)).  This is known as the Product Rule.

If f(x)=g(x)/h(x), then f'(x)=(g'(x)*h(x))-(g(x)*h'(x))/[h(x)]<sup>2</sup>. This is known as the Quotien Rule.

If f(x)=g(h(x)), then f'(x)=g'(h(x))*h'(x). This is known as the Chain Rule.

__Usage__

Compute the derivative to know if a function increases or descreases. Compute the 2nd order derivatives to find maxima or minima (i.e. which value gives 0, a typical optimization problem). Compute integrals for areas under the curve (typical application being the probability of occurance between 2 values).

For instance, take the parabollic equation:  k(x)=−10x<sup>2</sup>+100x+3

_When does k reach its maximal value?_  The derivative is k'(x)=-20x+100. Solving for -20x+100=0 we obtain x=5, that is the parabollic equation reaches maximal value at x=5.

_Is this a maximum or a minimum?_ It's not always obvious to know the direction and therefore tell from the derivative if one reaches a maximum or mininum. _Taking the second order derivative_ however tells is the direction of the rate of change, if positive it's a minimum, if negative it's a maximum. The second order derivative here is k''(x)=-20. This tells us the derivative is linear and decreasing and therefore this must be a maximum.

__Partial Derivatives__

Instead of having a single variable, a function can operate simultaneously on multiple variables. Optimizing such function requires to compute _partial derivatives_, that is derivatives for each variable, conditioning on the others.

For instance, f(x,y)=x<sup>2</sup>+y<sup>2</sup>, gives f'(x,y)= $\delta$(x<sup>2</sup>+y<sup>2</sup>)/$\delta$x.
We solve by taking each part, i.e. $\delta$x<sup>2</sup>/$\delta$x and $\delta$y<sup>2</sup>/$\delta$x, and optimizing for x=0.
- the derivative of $\delta$x<sup>2</sup>/$\delta$x is 2x.
- the derivative of $\delta$y<sup>2</sup>/$\delta$x is 0.
- thus $\delta$(x<sup>2</sup>+y<sup>2</sup>)/$\delta$x = 2x+0.

We solve f'(x,y)= $\delta$(x<sup>2</sup>+y<sup>2</sup>)/$\delta$y by taking each part and optimizing for y=0.
- the derivative of $\delta$x<sup>2</sup>/$\delta$y is 0.
- the derivative of $\delta$y<sup>2</sup>/$\delta$y is 2y.
- thus $\delta$(x<sup>2</sup>+y<sup>2</sup>)/$\delta$y = 0+2y.

_Computing gradients_

Using partial derivatives, we can find the maximum and minimum in N dimentional space. The solution is a _gradient_, i.e. a  vector of variables.

For instance, f(x,y)=x<sup>2</sup>+y<sup>2</sup>, gives _grad(f'(x,y)) =_
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
2x\\
2y\\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

Obviously, the minimum here is [0 0] but in general, we can use gradients to orient to solution. For instance, a _gradient descent_ algorithm will do:

1. Take some starting guess for x and y.
2. Compute the gradient.
3. Take a small step* in the direction of the gradient.
4. Determine if the gradient is close to zero. If so, then stop, since the gradient will be zero at the minimum otherwise repeat.

'*' the step size is another parameter, to big and the minimum can be missed, to small and the solution could converge on a local minimum (see cost functions)
